# C Fundamentals

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    printf("To C, or not to C: that is the question.\n);
    return 0;
}
```


It is necessary to include C standard I/O library.

---

## Compiling and Linking

Converts source code to executable program.

- **Preprocessing**
    - Modifies the program by following *directives* instructions.
    - *Directives* are code in C that starts with `#`.
- **Compiling**
    - Translates modified program to machine instructions(*object code*).
- **Linking**
    - A **linker** combines object code & additional code to complete executable program.
    - Additional code includes library functions, like `printf`, that are used in the program.

---

A C program can have consist of many functions but only the `main` function is mandatory since it gets called automatically when the program is executed.

---

## Variable & Assignment

|type|values|
|---|---|
|int|whole numbers|
|float|can store largeer numbers than `int` and numbers with digits after a decimal point|

Every variable **must be declared** with a type before we assign a value or **initialize a value during declaration**.

```c
int number;
int number2 = 2;
```
Both of these are valid declarations.

---

## Reading Input

We read an input from a user using `scanf`.
```c
int x;
printf("Input a number: ");
scanf("%d", &x);
```

It is important that we add `&` before the variable `x` when dealing with `scanf`. This tells our program to store the entered input by the user into `x`.

---

## Defining Names for Constants

We can name a constant using a feature in C called **macro-definition**.

```c
#define INCHES_PER_POUND 166
```

`#define` is a preprocessing directive just like `#include`. We can use it as a variable in our functions. The preprocessor replaces each macro by the value it represents.

We can even use expressions when defining macros.