# Formatted Input/Output

## Conversion Specifications

**Conversion specifications** begin with the character `%d`. It is a placeholder representing a value to be filled during printing.

The form of a conversion specification is *%m.pX* or *%-m.pX*, where *m* and *p* are interger constants, which are optional, and *X* which is a letter.

In *%10.2f*, *10* is *m*, *2* is *p*, and *f* is *X*.

*m* in conversion specifications is the **minimum field width**. It specifies the minimum number of characters to print.

`%4d%` would display `123` as `<space>123`. The printed value would fill in the minimum number of required characters as space.

*p* is **precision**. It depends on *X*, the **conversion specifier** to indicate which conversion should be applied to the value.

|Conversion Specification|Type|
|---|---|
|%d|int|
|%e|float in exponential form
|%f|float in fixed decimal point|
|%g|float in either exponential form or fixed decimal form, depending on the number's size|

---

## Escape Sequences

**Escape sequences** enable strings to contain characters that would otherwise cause problems for the compiler including nonprinting characters and some characters that have special meaning to the compiler (such as ").

Here are some of the few escape sequences:

|Escape Sequence|Value|
|---|---|
|\a|Alert(bell)|
|\b|Backspace|
|\n|New line|
|\t|Horizontal tab|
|\"|" character|

---

## `scanf` Function

`scanf` is essentially a "pattern-matching" function that trues to match up groups if input characters with conversion specifications.

### Use of Ordinary Characters in `scanf`

We can also use ordinary characters in format strings in addition to conversion specifications but we should take not that the action `scanf` takes when it processes an ordinary charater in a format string depends on whether or not it's a white-space character.

- **White-space characters**
	- When `scanf` encounters white-space characters in a format string, it repeatedly reads white-space characters from the input until it reaches a non-white-space character (which is "put back").
	- The number of white-space characters in the format string is irrelevant; one white-space character in the format string will match any number of white-space characters in the input.
- **Other characters**
	-	When `scanf` encounters a non-white-space character in a format string, `scanf` compares it with the next input character. 
	-	If the two characters match, `scanf` discards the input character and continues processing the format string.
	-	If it doesn't match, `scanf` puts the offending character back into the input then aborts without processing the format string.

---
**Example**
For `%d/%d`:

*Input 1*: `<space>5/<space>96`, `scanf`

1. `scanf` skips the first space while looking for an `int`
2. Matches `%d` with `5`
3. Matches `/` with `/`
4. Skips a space while looking for another integer
5. Matches `%d` with `96`

*Input 2*:
`<space>5<space>/<space>96`

1. `scanf` skips one space
2. Matches `%d` with `5`
3. Attempts to match the `/` in the format string with the `<space>` in the input
4. Not a match so `scanf` puts the space back
5. `<space>/<space>96` characters remain to be read by the next call to `scanf`

To allow spaces after the first number, we should use the format string `%d /%d` instead.

> Instead of `%d`, we can also use `%i` conversion to use for reading and writing integers.
> 
> The difference is `%i` can be used to match any integer type.
>
> Octal (base 8); number written with 0 as a prefix (as in 056). Hexadecimal (base 16); number with 0x or 0X prefix (as in 0x56).
